CS1050 –Lab1Fall2021Concepts to Practice•

Connecting to the Teaching Cluster (the server; aka tc.rnet.missouri.edu)•Editing a file using vim•Compiling a program•File TransferSubmission Information
(you will do this at the end of your lab)Submit this assignment by following the instructions given by your TA.  

SUBMIT ONLY the .c file (no a.out or executable file is required).  All of the lab assignments must be submitted before the end of the lab using the lab code 
given by the TA.  Use the following submit command:mucs submit <class> <assignment_type> <filename>For example:mucs submit 1050 lab x-lab1.cFilenames must be: 
sectionletter-lab1.c(include your respective lab section, e.g., a-lab1.c).DescriptionFor this course we will be coding in C and will be programming in a Unix 
environment (if you do not know what that means,don’t worry). To connect to the server that our code will be hosted on, we will use PuTTY –this software is 
available on Mizzoulab computers but you will want to download it to your deviceif you are using a Windows computer for labs. It is a free piece of software.  
If you have a Mac, you will not need PuTTY and canuse the built-in Terminalprogram.  Here is the link todownload PuTTY if you need it
:https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/latest.html

Connecting to the ServerUsing WindowsFirst, open PuTTY by hitting the windows key () and then typing “putty” to search for the program. After the program opens,
type in tc.rnet.missouri.edu for the Host Name (make sure that SSH is selected and the port is 22 (picture below).NOTE: When prompted if you trust the source you 
are connecting to hit yes.After connecting you should be prompted with text that shows “login as: ” –type your pawprint (your pawprint is a string 5-6 with digits 
and characters –NOT your student number) and hit enter. It will then ask you for your password (this will be the same password that you use for MyZou).  Note 
that when you are typing your password it will not show anything–but you are still entering it –you just can’t see it.Using MacUsing a Mac is very similar to 
using PuTTY on Windows.However, Mac already has a built-in program called “Terminal”,so PuTTY is not needed.  Just run Terminal.  From the prompt, type in:ssh 
pawprint@tc.rnet.missouri.eduNote that “pawprint” in the above line should be replaced with your actual pawprint ID.  You will be asked for your password as shown 
above under the “Using Windows” section.  Again, you will not see your password as you type it (for security).

Basic UNIX CommandsHere are the basic Unix commands you will need to know in order to create directories, navigate through them, and create files/code.List of 
commands:•mkdir directoryname–“mkdir” stands for “make directory” andwill create a new directory (think of it like a folder on your computer) with the name that 
you give it. •ls–“ls” stands for “list”and will show all of the files/directories in the directory you are currently in.•cd directoryname–“cd” stands for 
“change directory”and will move you into the directory that you specify. If you want to move back a directory you would type “cd ..” •pwd–“pwd” stands for 
“print working directory”and will show you the current “path” of directories you are in.•vim filename.c–“vim” is a text editor and will be the primary way that 
we will edit our code. By typing “vim lab1.c” it will create a file called “lab1.c” and will automatically take us into that file. To re-enter a file that 
currently exists you would still type “vimlab1.c” to enter that file.VIM Editor TipsIf you do the command “vim .vimrc”, and type out(cutting and pasting might 
cause problems so if you want to cut and paste use the vimrc.txt file provided on Canvus)the following code and save it, it’ll make working in vim a bit easier:
set numberset mouse=aset background=darkcolorscheme eveningset expandtabset smarttabset shiftwidth=4set tabstop=4set lbrset tw=500set ai “Auto indentset si 
“Smart indentset wrap “Wrap linesTo save and quit, hit esc :wq

Getting StartedFor some labs thissemester, we will use the cs1050start command to get starter code and files that will help us begin thelab.  For this lab, you 
will probably want to create a subdirectory (e.g., “mkdir cs1050labs”) and go into that directory (e.g., “cd cs1050labs”).  At this point, you can get the 
starter code by issuing this command:cs1050start lab1Now you can gotothe lab1 subdirectory (“cd lab1”) and look around (“ls”).  You should see something like this:
Makefile  README.md  hello.cThis means that your new lab1 directory has 3 files in it named Makefile, README.md, and hello.c respectively.  If you want to see 
what the “Hello World” program should look like you can issue these commands:make hello./helloYou should see the program output this message:Hello world!Now it 
is your turn to write your own “Hello World” program.

Steps to creating our Hello World! program:1.Type vim lab1.c (make sure that the only space that you have is in-between vim and lab1.c –also make sure that you 
have the “.c” at the end of lab1 –otherwise your code won’t work).2.From here you willneed to hit the letter “i” on your keyboard to be able to type any code. In 
the bottom right of your screen you should see “--INSERT --" this shows that you are now able to start typing.3.From here, type the code shown below exactly as it 
appears –capitalization matters and but for the most part, spacing does not matter (for now).Explanation of the code: #include<stdio.h> –will “include” a pre-built 
library of different functions that we can use –this is not the only library that exists but it’s theonly one we need for this program. Libraries are incredibly 
useful as they save us a ton of time since we don’t need to code everything ourselves thanks to them.int main(void) –think of this as the “driver” portion of our 
code –when we compile the codeit will know to look for a function called “main” in order to know where to start the program.printf(“Hello World!\n”); –printf will 
print whatever is in the quotation marks. \n tells the code to then add a new line wherever we put it.4.After typing the code, in order to compile it we will need 
to exit the code and return to our terminal screen. To do that, hit the ESC key –after hitting the key you should no longer see “--INSERT --” in the bottom left 
hand corner of your screen. From here, type :wq this stands for write, quit which will save the code and then exit it. If you ever horribly mess up your code and 
want to revert to your last save you can type :edit! and it will revert all of your changes to the last save of your code –there is no way to get your changes 
back after typing that so only do that if you know for sure you want to revert your code.5.From here, we should be back on our terminal screen (where we were 
prior to typing vim lab1.c). In order to compile our code, type the following: compile lab1.c –this will make our code “readable” to the computer.6.After doing 
that if you type “ls” you should now see an executable called “a.out” –there are ways to rename our executable, but for this course we’ll leave it alone. From 
here, type ./a.out –this will execute our code and you should see Hello World! displayed if everything worked properly.

7.Now you’re ready to submit your code! In order to submit the code, type the following command exactly as shown.mucs submit 1050 lab lab1.cNOTE: if you named 
your file something other than lab1.c you will need to change “lab1.c” in the above command to whatever you named your file. 8.After submitting you should receive 
text saying the submission was successful!

Using a File Transfer Protocol (FTP) clientFor this lab, we will be using Filezilla as our FTP client.  You may choose to use SecureFX or any other FTP client if 
you prefer.  Filezilla is a free download available here: https://filezilla-project.org/download.php?type=clientYou likely want to download the standard edition 
with the “Download” button on the far left, as that edition is free:After opening the program, your screen should look something like this:

At the top, next to “Host”, type in tc.rnet.missouri.edu and then your pawprint next to “Username” and then your password next to “Password”.  The port should be 
22. Click the “Quickconnect” button.  Now your screen should look similar to this:The files on the left side are what’s on your computer and the files on the right 
are what are on your personal portion of tc.rnet –to transfer a file simply click and drag that file from one side to the other!For the purposes of CS 1050 that’s 
about all you’ll need to know for how an FTP client works! 

Guidelines for Grading Lab 110 Points PossibleGeneralThis section of the lab handout will tell you how we plan to grade your program.  For this one, you really 
should get all 10 points as long as you typed in the program and submitted it properly.  However, in the future, there may be parts of your program that work and 
parts that do not work.  This “rubric” will help you understand which parts of your program are most important to get right so you can get as many points as 
possible.  Also, in future labs, we will ask you to have a comment header at the top of your file and we will also ask that your code is nicely indented and 
formatted.
